But let's talk about actually
creating the design system and
how I go about building it
from a design point of view.
I keep adding that because I know
obviously it's slightly different from
developer point of view.
I started my styles, right?
So yeah, I maybe mockup some pages
to just get a feel of what I want
the design to look like.
But once I've got past that bit and
I'm ready to actually create the design
system, the first thing I
do is work on the styles.
And the first thing I work on in
the styles bit is I set a grid, right?
So I take my design that I've got and
I work out what the underlying grid is.
My advice with this based on
my years of experience is to
add more columns than you think
you need when you create a grid.
Cuz you see things like bootstrap and
these various other frameworks and
they all have 12 columns, it's
everything's 12 columns East States, but
oftentimes you need more than that.
So I take whatever you think you need and
double it,
[LAUGH] because you won't regret it later.
So I tend to create
a bit of a grid layout.
And then I work through and
I start setting the padding for my layout.
And what I mean by that is so when you
create your grid, you're gonna obviously
have gutters between each of your columns,
and you're gonna decide what those are.
But then within the components,
you're gonna have padding and
margin that goes in your components.
So it's worth defining
all of those as well.
Now, when l work in Figma,
I define all of those as variables.
Which is a relatively new
function within In Figma and
it's really worth doing that because
once they're defined as variables,
if you suddenly decide you wanna
give everything a bit more space,
you can just up the variable in one
place and it ripples through everywhere.
Also, that tends to be more in line
with how you develop things as well.
You don't tend to hard code values in,
you'll set them as variables and
then you can adjust them at least
if you're doing it properly.
So I tend to do that next.
So I've got different paddings,
I've got different values for
margins and that kinda thing.
And don't forget of course that
Steve will cover this more in his
in-depth dive on Figma.
Then I tend to look at typography and
I go through and I set my styles for
typography within Figma.
Unfortunately, you can't have
variables in typographic
styles in Figma yet,
which is a bit annoying, so
I can't set my font sizes as variables,
which annoys me, but anyway.
So the ones I mainly set straight away is
I define all my five levels of headings.
I tend to never use all of them,
but I like them to be there anyway.
I include variations for different
weightings for each of those sizes,
and then I add additional styling for
things like underlines,
strikethroughs, capital letters,
that kinda thing.
So, we're including our headings,
we're including our paragraphs,
our block quotes,
all of that kinda typographic
stuff then gets created as styles.
So you can see how really you're gonna
need to mock up a couple of pages first
before you've got something to work with
cuz otherwise you've got no context for
anything.
Then I tend to pay attention to colours.
So I do this in a bit, but
this might be a main thing.
All right, so
don't feel you have to carry this over.
There are two ways of
defining colors in Figma.
You can define them as variables, or
you can define them as styles, right?
And I actually use both.
So what I do is I define my
colors primarily as variables.
So as you're seeing on the screen,
you're seeing here all of the colors for
one project there defined as variables.
So there's primary 1, primary 2,
primary 3, primary 4, and then secondary.
And they're all variables, right?
So they're completely independent
of any particular element.
But then in my styles,
I go in and define which of
those variable colors I use for
specific use cases.
So for example, my borders,
right, that I go around every but
my boxes are going to be secondary
color three, for example.
Now what that means is that later on,
if I want to universally change
a color across the whole site,
I can change it at the variable level,
okay?
If I, however, just wanna change
the border color everywhere across
the whole site,
I can change it at the style level.
Does that make sense?
Cuz it's a bit of a mind bender, right?
You don't have to do it like that,
you could choose to pick just variables or
pick style, but for
me that tends to separating out,
I wanna change the color universally
from I wanna change the color as it is
applied to a specific item like a border,
tends to work quite well for me, right?
But whatever.
And Stephen his workshop might
suggest something totally different.
That's the thing, there is no right or
wrong answer with all of this stuff.
So, also then, the other element
with colors is if a component is
put on a dark background
compared to a white background,
the colors have got to be different,
right?
Now, fortunately, just this is
adding another level of complexity.
I do apologize, it's not my fault
it's complicated, it's Figma's.
They have introduced like this
modes thing that you can add.
So with each of your colors,
when you set it as a variable,
you can say, this is the color for
light mode, and this is the color,
the same color if it's put on a dark
background, a dark mode, right?
So you can kind of see on this graphic,
it's not very good I apologize.
It's so flipping small, but
you could have primary color one,
right, so
that's the first one in the list.
And if it's on a light background,
it has a dark version of that color and
if it's on a dark background,
it has a light version of that color.
So it's adapting based on
the background it is and
that will make life a lot easier once
you got a load of components and
you're dragging them and
dropping them into columns.
If that column has got a dark background
you can just say this is a dark
background and that's an option in
Figma and Steve will teach you that.
But once it's in there it'll automatically
adjust the colors appropriately,
which will make your life a lot easier,
otherwise your are constantly
overriding colors.
So be aware of that one as well.
Right, the other thing I
would look at is aesthetics,
which basically boils down to two things.
Rounded corners, so
I'll go into my variables and
I'll set different size rounded
corners I wanna use, right?
Typically, these are big,
medium, and small, right?
So it might be two pixels for
small, it might be five pixels for
medium, and
it might be ten pixels for big.
And then if I ever wanna change those in
the future, I can just change it once,
place, and it'll ripple through
the whole design system.
So that's worth doing.
And then drop shadows is the other
one where I set that as a style.
I have different style drop shadows
which you can set in your effects style.
So the styles in some ways are the most
complicated bit of the whole thing.
Cuz with these variables now and
these modes and
stuff like that is a bit of mindbender.
So once you've got your style sorted out,
now you can pay attention
to your basic elements.
Which basically boil down to
form elements, links, dividers,
buttons, iconography,
tags, things like that.
So I go through and I style up all
those different things, right?
Every form element, every button,
every link, every divider,
all of those little micro
elements we now style up, right?
So you can see a load of
them on the screen there.
But don't forget your states,
as I ranted about earlier.
So for each of those elements,
we've now got a set of hover state and
active state, a selected state,
an expanded state, right?
And we got to do that for buttons, we got
to do it for links, we got to do it for
form elements, we gotta do it for
a, what was it?
What was the name of the equipment?
>> So we hide things.
>> So we hide things, yeah.
So we really need to kind of go
through every single one of those,
making sure all the multiple
states to that.
So there's quite a lot of work in that
stage building out all of those elements.
Once you've done all of that, and
that's done, by the way those different
states are done using components and
you can switch between components.
I was gonna get into all of that but I'm
sure Steve will do a far better job about
telling you how to build components well,
so we'll leave him doing that.
But once you've done
all of those elements,
then you can build out your components and
the components you need will be totally
dependent on your project and
what it is that you're doing.
But I mean,
here's just a random few that Kind of,
I pulled off of a recent project I was
working on, but there could be many,
many more,
depending on what it is that you're doing.
It can mess with your mind
working on components.
So, it's all about abstraction, right?
And this is where as developers,
those of you who are watching
this who are developers,
may well get pulled into a level of
abstraction that you regret later, okay?
So let me explain what I mean.
When you build a component,
let's take, say, for example,
a news listing component, right?
You're gonna list news stories, right?
So a news listing component probably
consists of a thumbnail image,
a heading, a description,
a published date and an author.
Sounds about right than it,
that's the kind of thing you want
when you're listing out a new story.
Great, that's wonderful, right?
So we build a news component,
well, hang on a minute, right?
What about an events component?
Look how much overlap there is.
Image, heading, description, sort of
a published date as a start date and
time, and you've got an end date and time.
Well, hang on a minute.
We can combine these together into a
single event slash news component, right?
And we can just make them, the author we
can have as an optional one that turns on
and off and the end date we can make as an
optional one that turns on and off, right?
Makes a lot of sense that's
a smaller code base to look after.
You're you're sucking in
your breath there and
you're right,
it looks really good on paper and
it kind of makes sense in a lot of ways,
but
it comes back to bite you because you go,
well, hang on a minute.
At a later date you wanna do
something different with news, but
you've now got so many conditions.
So you've got different conditions going
on for the news elements within the same
component and the component becomes
more and more complicated, right?
But then, you can have the opposite
problem as well when you end up creating
a load of additional components that
aren't really needed cuz they're so
similar to other components.
So there is a happy medium somewhere in
there, and I wish I could give you a set
of rules that say do this and
don't do that, but it's not that simple.
But I would be very more careful
of ending up combining everything
together than having things separate.
I think it's better to have things
separate than it is to have one
component to rule them all,
which is you can easily get into that
kind of mentality if you
go down the rabbit hole.
So basically then it's all about
just building out the components,
building out the elements,
building out your styles.
And Steve's tour of Figma and
using Figma will teach you all of
that kind of stuff, I am sure.
But there are other elements to
design systems that are a little
bit more opaque and not so
easy to think about, and
this comes back to what you've been
patiently waiting for me to talk about,
which is modals and usage of different
elements at different times.
And this is a really big thing cuz it's
not just about having a component,
okay, we've got a component.
Equally critical is when you use that
component and when you don't, and
actually these are three
great examples here, right?
So we've got any three examples,
we've got a model, we've got a drawer, and
then we've got an expandable
overlay thing, right?
And when I was working on this app and
I was looking, they had these three
components already, but it was random
as to what you got, [LAUGH] right?
You clicked on a button, you didn't know
whether you were gonna get a drawer,
you didn't know whether you
were gonna get a model,
you didn't know whether you were
gonna get a popover or anything else.
It was just like,
whatever the developer felt like at
that particular moment is what you got.
So having rules around the usage of
your components is worth having.
So, for example, we use draws
when we wanna display additional
information that adds to the information
that they were previously viewing,
right, without having to go off
to an entirely different screen.
I'm not saying you do this,
I'm just saying these
are the kinds of rules we made.
And then we use modals,
where we want a user to confirm or
act on something that's happened
before they proceed, right?
And we use a pop up overlay,
which is the one on the left,
when we want people to take a quick
optional action that's up to them.
And our logic for
that is a draw provides a lot of space.
So you've got a lot of space to
add a lot of content, a modal,
you can't interact with anything behind
the modal until you've taken the action
that's in front of you.
So that's why it's the right choice for
things where you need to act on it.
While a pop up overlays for
optional actions that you could go on,
I don't wanna do that and
carry on with what you were doing, right?
That was our logic in
that particular case.
The logic doesn't matter, what matters
is that there is logic in place
that you know when you're gonna
use one thing over another.
So thinking that through is
really worthwhile as well.
The other little kind of gotcha
that sometimes happens with design
systems is you can get so bogged down
in the working on components and
elements and this kind of stuff that
you forget to step back, right?
And every now and again create
a page with these elements in rather
than looking at them in isolation
because sometimes it can go
horribly wrong when you put
them all on the same page.
The biggest thing is it ends up looking
incredibly busy cuz there's just so
much going on cuz you've put too much
in each individual component, but
you don't notice it until all
the components are together.
So make entire pages from them.